.\" Man page for perf-tests.sh
.TH PERF-TESTS 1 "2024" "RustOwl" "RustOwl Performance Testing"
.SH NAME
perf-tests.sh \- Performance testing and regression analysis for RustOwl
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B perf-tests.sh
[\fIOPTION\fR]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBperf-tests.sh\fR script provides comprehensive performance testing and regression analysis for RustOwl. It compares the current code changes against a baseline version by automatically managing git stashes, building both versions, and measuring various performance metrics.

The script is designed to help developers validate that their changes don't introduce performance regressions while also detecting genuine performance improvements.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Display help information and exit
.TP
.B \-\-verify
Check the testing environment without running performance tests. Shows git status, existing binaries, and system information.
.TP
.B \-\-prepare
Build both baseline and current versions separately without running performance comparisons. Useful for pre-building binaries.
.TP
.B \-\-compare
Run performance comparisons on pre-built binaries. Requires that \fB\-\-prepare\fR has been run first.
.TP
.B \-\-stability
Run multiple iterations of performance tests to check measurement consistency and detect unstable results.
.TP
.B \-\-force
Force rebuild of existing binaries even if they already exist.
.TP
.B \-\-cold
Clear system caches before each performance test. This provides more consistent and realistic measurements by eliminating cache effects.

.SH TESTING MODES
.SS Default Mode
When run without arguments, the script performs a complete automated test:
.IP 1. 4
Verifies git repository state
.IP 2. 4
Stashes current changes (if any)
.IP 3. 4
Builds baseline version
.IP 4. 4
Restores changes and builds current version
.IP 5. 4
Runs performance comparisons
.IP 6. 4
Cleans up temporary files

.SS Stepwise Testing
For more control, use the stepwise testing options:

.B \-\-verify
to check environment setup

.B \-\-prepare
to build both versions

.B \-\-compare
to run performance tests

.B \-\-stability
to validate result consistency

.SH MEASUREMENTS
The script provides comprehensive analysis across multiple dimensions:

.SS Binary Analysis
.IP \(bu 4
Binary size comparison with percentage differences
.IP \(bu 4
Symbol count analysis (requires \fBnm\fR)
.IP \(bu 4
Strip analysis showing debug symbol overhead
.IP \(bu 4
SHA256 hash verification to ensure different binaries

.SS Performance Metrics
.IP \(bu 4
Execution time (wall clock)
.IP \(bu 4
Peak memory usage (RSS)
.IP \(bu 4
Page faults (major/minor)
.IP \(bu 4
Context switches (voluntary/involuntary)

.SS Advanced Analysis
When optional tools are available:
.IP \(bu 4
Statistical benchmarking with confidence intervals (\fBhyperfine\fR)
.IP \(bu 4
Memory profiling with heap analysis (\fBvalgrind\fR on Linux)
.IP \(bu 4
CPU profiling recommendations

.SS Verification Features
.IP \(bu 4
Git workflow validation (stash/unstash operations)
.IP \(bu 4
Binary functionality testing before measurement
.IP \(bu 4
Environment sanity checks

.SH CACHE MANAGEMENT
Performance measurements can be significantly affected by various system caches. The \fB\-\-cold\fR option addresses this by clearing:

.SS Filesystem Caches
.IP \(bu 4
macOS: Uses \fBpurge\fR command
.IP \(bu 4
Linux: Drops page cache via \fB/proc/sys/vm/drop_caches\fR

.SS Build Caches
.IP \(bu 4
Cargo incremental compilation cache
.IP \(bu 4
Rust compilation artifacts

.SS CPU Caches
.IP \(bu 4
L1/L2/L3 instruction and data caches
.IP \(bu 4
Branch prediction tables

.PP
\fBNote:\fR Cache clearing may require sudo privileges on some systems.

.SH DEPENDENCIES
.SS Required
.IP \(bu 4
\fBgit\fR \- Version control operations
.IP \(bu 4
\fBcargo\fR \- Rust build system
.IP \(bu 4
\fBbc\fR \- Mathematical calculations

.SS Optional (Enhanced Features)
.IP \(bu 4
\fBhyperfine\fR \- Statistical benchmarking with confidence intervals
.IP \(bu 4
\fBvalgrind\fR \- Memory profiling (Linux only)
.IP \(bu 4
\fBnm\fR \- Symbol analysis
.IP \(bu 4
\fBpurge\fR \- Cache clearing (macOS)

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B perf-tests.sh
Run complete automated performance test
.TP
.B perf-tests.sh \-\-cold
Run test with cache clearing for consistent results
.TP
.B perf-tests.sh \-\-verify
Check environment and show current state
.TP
.B perf-tests.sh \-\-prepare && perf-tests.sh \-\-compare
Build versions separately, then test
.TP
.B perf-tests.sh \-\-stability
Run multiple iterations to check measurement consistency

.SH INTERPRETING RESULTS
.SS Binary Size Changes
.IP \(bu 4
Positive percentage: Binary grew (potential concern)
.IP \(bu 4
Negative percentage: Binary shrunk (potential improvement)
.IP \(bu 4
Identical sizes with different code: Investigation needed

.SS Performance Changes
.IP \(bu 4
Execution time: Lower is better
.IP \(bu 4
Memory usage: Lower is generally better
.IP \(bu 4
Page faults: Lower indicates better memory efficiency
.IP \(bu 4
Context switches: Lower may indicate better CPU utilization

.SS Cache Effects
.IP \(bu 4
First run (cold): Realistic user experience
.IP \(bu 4
Subsequent runs (warm): Optimistic results
.IP \(bu 4
Large variations: Consider using \fB\-\-cold\fR or \fB\-\-stability\fR

.SH TROUBLESHOOTING
.SS Common Issues
.TP
.B Identical binary sizes with different SHA256 hashes
The binaries contain different metadata but identical code. This can happen with timestamp differences or debug information.

.TP
.B Large performance variations between runs
System load or cache effects. Use \fB\-\-cold\fR for consistency or \fB\-\-stability\fR to check variation.

.TP
.B "Uncommitted changes" warnings
The script detects uncommitted changes and will stash them. Ensure important work is committed first.

.TP
.B Permission denied on cache clearing
Cache clearing may require sudo privileges. The script will continue without clearing caches if permissions are insufficient.

.SS Debug Information
Use \fB\-\-verify\fR to check:
.IP \(bu 4
Git repository status
.IP \(bu 4
Existing binary states
.IP \(bu 4
Available tools and dependencies
.IP \(bu 4
System information

.SH FILES
.TP
.B rustowl-baseline
Baseline binary for comparison
.TP
.B rustowl-current
Current version binary
.TP
.B rustowlc-baseline
Baseline compiler binary
.TP
.B rustowlc-current
Current compiler binary

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B CARGO_TARGET_DIR
Cargo build directory (default: target/)
.TP
.B RUST_BACKTRACE
Set to 1 for detailed error traces
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disable colored output

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success
.TP
.B 1
General error (missing tools, build failure)
.TP
.B 2
Git repository issues
.TP
.B 3
Binary verification failure

.SH NOTES
This script is designed for development and CI/CD environments. It requires a clean git working directory or will automatically stash changes.

For accurate performance measurements, consider running multiple iterations and using the \fB\-\-cold\fR option to eliminate cache effects.

The script prioritizes reproducibility and verification over raw speed, making it suitable for regression testing and performance validation.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR cargo (1),
.BR git (1),
.BR hyperfine (1),
.BR valgrind (1)

.SH AUTHOR
RustOwl development team
              Runs the complete workflow: prepare environment, build both versions, and
              compare performance. This is the standard mode for most use cases.

       Stepwise Testing
              Break the testing process into individual steps for debugging or detailed
              analysis:
              1. --verify   : Check environment
              2. --prepare  : Build both versions
              3. --stability: Multi-iteration testing
              4. --compare  : Performance comparison

MEASUREMENTS
       Binary Analysis
              • Binary size comparison with percentage differences
              • Symbol count analysis (if nm is available)
              • Strip analysis showing debug symbol overhead

       Performance Metrics
              • Execution time (wall clock)
              • Peak memory usage (RSS - Resident Set Size)
              • Page faults (major/minor indicating I/O and memory pressure)
              • Context switches (voluntary/involuntary revealing scheduling behavior)

       Verification Features
              • SHA256 hash comparison to ensure different binaries
              • Git workflow validation (stash/unstash operations)
              • Binary functionality testing before measurement
              • Multi-iteration stability checking

CACHE EFFECTS
       Performance measurements are significantly affected by system caches. First runs
       typically show "cold" performance with full disk I/O, while subsequent runs show
       "warm" performance with cached data.

       Common Cache Types:
              • Filesystem cache (page cache) - Most significant impact
              • Binary/library cache - Dynamic linker caching
              • CPU caches - L1/L2/L3 and branch prediction
              • Rust build cache - Incremental compilation artifacts

       Cache Clearing:
              macOS: sudo purge
              Linux: sudo sync && echo 3 | sudo tee /proc/sys/vm/drop_caches
              Rust:  cargo clean

       Use --cold option for automated cache clearing between tests.

TOOL REQUIREMENTS
       Required Tools
              git    - Version control operations
              cargo  - Rust build system  
              bc     - Mathematical calculations

       Optional Tools
              hyperfine - Statistical benchmarking with confidence intervals
              valgrind  - Memory profiling (Linux only)
              perf      - CPU profiling (Linux only)
              nm        - Symbol table analysis
              strip     - Debug symbol removal

       The script automatically detects available tools and adapts functionality accordingly.
       Missing optional tools will show installation suggestions.

RESULT INTERPRETATION
       Normal Results
              • Small performance differences (<2x)
              • Consistent results across multiple runs
              • Different binary hashes for baseline vs current

       Suspicious Results (Investigate Further)
              • Identical binary hashes (no code changes detected)
              • Extreme performance differences (>10x)
              • Zero page faults (suggests warm cache or measurement issues)
              • High variation between runs (>2x difference)

       Best Practices
              • Run --verify first to check environment
              • Use --stability for significant performance claims
              • Test on quiet systems with minimal background processes
              • Consider both cold and warm performance metrics
              • Run multiple times to confirm consistency

EXAMPLES
       Basic performance test:
              ./scripts/perf-tests.sh

       Debug suspicious results:
              ./scripts/perf-tests.sh --verify
              ./scripts/perf-tests.sh --prepare --force
              ./scripts/perf-tests.sh --stability

       Cold performance testing:
              ./scripts/perf-tests.sh --cold

       Build and test separately:
              ./scripts/perf-tests.sh --prepare
              ./scripts/perf-tests.sh --compare

EXIT STATUS
       0      Success
       1      Missing required tools or build failure
       2      Invalid command line arguments

FILES
       ./rustowl-baseline     Temporary baseline binary
       ./rustowl-current      Temporary current binary
       ./rustowlc-baseline    Temporary baseline compiler binary
       ./rustowlc-current     Temporary current compiler binary

       These files are automatically cleaned up after testing unless the script fails.

ENVIRONMENT
       RUSTC_BOOTSTRAP        May be set for stable compiler builds
       CARGO_TARGET_DIR       Custom target directory for builds

SEE ALSO
       cargo(1), git(1), hyperfine(1), valgrind(1), perf(1)

       RustOwl documentation: docs/CONTRIBUTING.md

BUGS
       Report bugs to the RustOwl issue tracker.

AUTHORS
       Written by the RustOwl development team.

RustOwl                                2025-05-31                           PERF-TESTS(1)
